---
layout: default
title: Publications
permalink: /publications/
---

### Peer-reviewed journal articles
Soriano, M.A. and Maxwell, R.M. (2023). Spatial aggregation effects on the performance of machine learning metamodels for predicting transit time to baseflow. <i>Environmental Research Communications.</i> 5, 115002. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1088/2515-7620/ad0744" title="erc">doi: 10.1088/2515-7620/ad0744</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Warren, J.L., Clark, C.J., Johnson, N.P., Siegel, H.G., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2023). Social vulnerability and groundwater vulnerability to contamination from unconventional hydrocarbon extraction in the Appalachian Basin. <i>GeoHealth.</i> 7, e2022GH000758. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1029/2022GH000758" title="geh">doi: 10.1029/2022GH000758</a>
<br /><br />Gaughan, C., Sorrentino, K.M., Liew, Z., Johnson, N.P., Clark, C.J., Soriano, M.A., Plano, J., Plata, D.P., Saiers, J.E., and Deziel, N.C. (2023). Residential proximity to unconventional oil and gas development and birth defects in Ohio. <i>Environmental Research.</i> 229, 115937 <a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2023.115937" title="enr">doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2023.115937</a>
<br /><br />Siegel, H.G., Soriano, M.A., Clark, C.J., Johnson, N.P., Wulsin, H.G., Plata, D.L., Deziel, N.C., Darrah, T.H., and Saiers, J.E. (2022). Natural and anthropogenic processes affecting domestic groundwater quality within the Northwestern Appalachian Basin. <i>Environmental Science & Technology.</i> 56(19), 13761-773. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c04011" title="est4">doi: 10.1021/acs.est.2c04011</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2022). Regional scale assessment of shallow groundwater vulnerability to contamination from unconventional hydrocarbon extraction. <i>Environmental Science & Technology.</i> 56(17), 12126-136. <a href="https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.est.2c00470" title="est3">doi: 10.1021/acs.est.2c00470</a>
<br /><br />Clark, C.J., Johnson, N.P., Soriano, M.A., Warren, J.L., Sorrentino, K.M., Kadan-Lottick, N.S., Saiers, J.E., Ma, X., and Deziel, N.C. (2022). Unconventional oil and gas development exposure and risk of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a case–control study in Pennsylvania, 2009–2017. Environmental Health Perspectives. <i>Environmental Health Perspectives.</i> 130(8), 087001. <a href="https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/EHP11092" title="ehp">doi: 10.1289/EHP11092</a>
<br /><br />Xiong, B., Soriano, M.A., Gutchess, K.M., Hoffman, N., Clark, C.J., Siegel, H.G., De Vera, G.A., Li, Y., Brenneis, R.J., Cox, A.J., Ryan, E.C., Sumner, A.J., Deziel, N.C., Saiers, J.E. and Plata, D.L. (2022). Groundwaters in northeastern Pennsylvania near intense hydraulic fracturing activities exhibit few organic chemical impacts. <i>Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts.</i> 24, 252-64. <a href="https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2022/em/d1em00124h" title="espi">doi: 10.1039/D1EM00124H</a>
<br /><br />Clark, C.J., Xiong, B., Soriano, M.A., Gutchess, K.M., Siegel, H.G., Ryan, E., Johnson, N.P., Cassell, K., Elliott, E.G., Li, Y., Cox, A.J., Bugher, N., Glist, L., Brenneis, R.J., Sorrentino, K.M., Plano, J., Ma, X., Warren, J.L., Plata, D.L., Saiers, J.E., and Deziel, N.C. (2022). Assessing unconventional oil and gas exposure in the Appalachian Basin: Comparison of exposure surrogates and residential drinking water measurements. <i>Environmental Science & Technology,</i> 56(2), 1091-103. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c05081" title="est2">doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c05081</a>
<br /><br />Li, Y., Thelemaque, N.A., Siegel, H.G., Clark, C.J., Ryan, E., Brenneis, R.J., Gutchess, K.M., Soriano, M.A., Xiong, B., Deziel, N.C., Saiers, J.E., and Plata, D.L. (2021). Groundwater methane in northeastern Pennsylvania attributable to thermogenic sources and hydrogeomorphologic migration pathways. <i>Environmental Science & Technology,</i> 55(24), 16413-422. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c05272" title="est">doi: 10.1021/acs.est.1c05272</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Siegel, H.G., Johnson, N.P., Gutchess, K.M., Xiong, B., Li, Y., Clark, C.J., Plata, D.L., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2021). Assessment of groundwater well vulnerability to contamination through physics-informed machine learning. <i>Environmental Research Letters,</i> 16(8), 084013. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac10e0" title="erl">doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/ac10e0</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Siegel, H.G., Gutchess, K.M., Clark, C.J., Li, Y., Xiong, B., Plata, D.L., Deziel, N.C. and Saiers, J.E. (2020). Evaluating domestic well vulnerability to contamination from unconventional oil and gas development sites. <i>Water Resources Research,</i> 56(10), e2020WR028005. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1029/2020WR028005" title="wrr">doi: 10.1029/2020WR028005</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. & Herath, S. (2020). Climate change and traditional upland paddy farming: a Philippine case study. <i>Paddy and Water Environment,</i> 18(2), 317-330. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s10333-019-00784-5" title="pawe">doi: 10.1007/s10333-019-00784-5</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. and Herath, S. (2018). Quantifying the role of traditional rice terraces in regulating water resources: implications for management and conservation efforts. <i>Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems,</i> 42(8), 885-910. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1080/21683565.2018.1437497" title="asfs">doi: 10.1080/21683565.2018.1437497</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Diwa, J. and Herath, S. (2017). Local perceptions of climate change and adaptation needs in the Ifugao Rice Terraces (Northern Philippines). <i>Journal of Mountain Science,</i> 14, 1455–1472. <a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s11629-016-4250-6" title="jms">doi: 10.1007/s11629-016-4250-6</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. and Castro, P.P.M. (2012). Assessment of the engineering aspects of the Ifugao Rice Terraces. <i>Philippine Engineering Journal,</i> 33(1), 1-10. <a href="https://www.journals.upd.edu.ph/index.php/pej/article/view/3469" title="pej">link</a>
<br /><br />

### Selected conference presentations
Soriano, M.A. and Maxwell, R.M. (2023). Influence of predictor aggregation on performance of machine learning metamodels for predicting transit time . (HS02-A005). 2023 Asia Oceania Geosciences Society Annual Meeting. 30 July - 4 August 2023, Singapore, SG.
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Yang, C., and Maxwell, R.M. (2022). Exploring linkages between transit time and water quality in streams across the conterminous USA. (H15U-1043). 2022 American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting. 12-16 December 2022, Chicago, IL.
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Warren, J.L., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2022). Examining associations between sociodemographic characteristics and groundwater vulnerability to contamination from unconventional oil and gas development. (6-7). The Geological Society of America Connects 2022. 9-12 October 2022, Denver, CO. <a href="https://gsa.confex.com/gsa/2022AM/webprogram/Paper380349.html" title="gsa22">doi: 10.1130/abs/2022AM-380349</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Siegel, H.G., Johnson, N.P., Gutchess, K.M., Xiong, B., Li, Y., Clark, C.J., Plata, D.L., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2021). Metamodeling of groundwater well vulnerability to contamination for elucidating potential impacts of shale gas development on water quality. (71-3). The Geological Society of America Connects 2021. 10-13 October 2021, Portland, OR. <a href="https://gsa.confex.com/gsa/2021AM/webprogram/Paper369703.html" title="gsa21">doi: 10.1130/abs/2021AM-369703</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. and Saiers, J.E. (2021). Characterizing potential impacts of shale gas development on groundwater quality using hybrid machine learning approaches. 37th Annual Yale School of the Environment Research Day. 16 April 2021, New Haven, CT. (online).
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. and Siegel, H.G. (2020). Evaluating potential impacts of unconventional oil and gas development on groundwater. YSE Confluence Research Seminar. 19 November 2020, New Haven, CT. (online).
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Gutchess, K.M., Siegel, H.G., Clark, C.J., Li, Y., Xiong, B., Plata, D.L., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2019). Capture probability and well vulnerability to contamination: A framework for evaluating potential impacts of unconventional oil & gas development on groundwater resources. (H51L-1643). 2019 American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting. 9-13 December 2019, San Francisco, CA.
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Barth-Naftilan, E., Gutchess, K.M., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2018). Modeling groundwater vulnerability to contamination from unconventional oil and gas development: Uncertainty analysis using linear-based methods. (H43D-2424). 2018 American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting. 10-14 December 2018, Washington, DC.
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Deziel, N.C., and Saiers, J.E. (2017). Towards a quantitative framework for evaluating vulnerability of drinking water wells to contamination from unconventional oil & gas development. (H53A-1430). 2017 American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting. 11-15 December 2017, New Orleans, LA.
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. and Saiers, J.E. (2017). Can ‘fracking’ contaminate drinking water? Approaching from the vulnerability side. 33rd Annual Yale Forestry & Environmental Studies Research Day. 21 April 2017, New Haven, CT.
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. and Herath, S. (2016). Climate change impacts on water resources and slope stability of the Ifugao Rice Terraces. 6th International Conference on Sustainability Science. 2-3 March 2016, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A., Bucton, B., and Castro, P.P.M. (2014). Assessment of the engineering aspects and hydrologic response to climatic variations in the Ifugao Rice Terraces. UNESCO National Commission of the Philippines Forum on Conservation of the Ifugao Cultural Landscape. 12 May 2014, Ateneo de Manila University, Quezon City, Philippines.
<br /><br />

### Other publications
Herath, S., Jiao, Y., Castro, P.P.M., Diwa, J., Soriano, M.A., Liang, L., Wang, Y., and Dulawan, L. (2016) Developing ecosystem-based adaptation strategies for enhancing of rice terrace farming systems against climate change. <i>Project Report,</i> Asia-Pacific Network for Global Change Research, Kobe, Japan. <a href="https://www.apn-gcr.org/publication/project-final-report-arcp2013-03cmy-herath/" title="apn">link</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. (2016) Editorial: Closing the gaps in the science-policy interface. <i>United Nations University Peace & Progress,</i> 3, 1-2. <a href="https://postgraduate.ias.unu.edu/upp/journal-issues/" title="upp">link</a>
<br /><br />Herath, S., Soriano, M.A., and Diwa, J. (2015) Bias-corrected daily precipitation estimates in the Ifugao Rice Terraces under climate change scenarios. <i>Rice Terrace Farming Systems Working Paper No. 3,</i> United Nations University, Tokyo, Japan. <a href="https://collections.unu.edu/view/UNU:3337" title="unu2">link</a>
<br /><br />Herath, S., Soriano, M.A., Diwa, J., and Bucton, B. (2015) Surface and groundwater flow response to climatic change in the Ifugao Rice Terraces. <i>Rice Terrace Farming Systems Working Paper No. 6,</i> United Nations University, Tokyo, Japan. <a href="http://collections.unu.edu/view/UNU:3338" title="unu1">link</a>
<br /><br />Soriano, M.A. (2013) Sustainable agriculture in the midst of climate change. <i>Engineering Times,</i> 3, 3. AMH Phil., Inc., Quezon City, Philippines. <a href="http://www.amhphil.com/publications/the-engineering-times-newsletter/" title="amh">link</a>
<br /><br />

### Media
04/13/2023 - <a href="https://news.agu.org/press-release/elderly-low-income-residents-most-vulnerable-to-groundwater-pollution-from-fracking-in-appalachia/" title="agupr">Elderly, low income residents most vulnerable to groundwater pollution from fracking in Appalachia</a>
<br /><br />10/17/2022 - <a href="https://open.spotify.com/show/6sS4mPEhKRsahn36OLsJez?si=8012186862dc4cdf&nd=1" title="ygwl">Expanding skillsets in hydrology- My PhD Writing Journey Ep. 3</a>
<br /><br />08/17/2022 - <a href="https://news.yale.edu/2022/08/17/proximity-fracking-sites-associated-risk-childhood-cancer" title="ynews">Proximity to fracking sites associated with risk of childhood cancer</a>
<br /><br />05/24/2022 - <a href="https://environment.yale.edu/news/article/brave-persistent-and-nimble-yse-class-2022-ready-defy-odds" title="ysen">Brave, persistent, and nimble, the YSE Class of 2022 is ready to defy the odds</a>
<br /><br />

### Service - Peer review
I have reviewed manuscripts for *Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts,* *Climatic Change,* *Regional Environmental Change,* *Chemosphere,* *Journal of Hydrology,* *Paddy & Water Environment,* *Computers & Geosciences,* and *Resources, Conservation & Recycling.* I provided peer feedback to manuscripts in preparation by graduate students and postdoctoral scholars across all scientific disciplines as a McDougal-Poorvu Writing Fellow at the Yale Poorvu Center's Graduate Writing Laboratory.
<br /><br />

### Service - Editorships
I served as Editor-in-chief for *Peace & Progress,* United Nations University's graduate student journal (2015-2016) and *Engineering Times,* AMH Philippines, Inc.'s company newsletter (2013). 